I am Pasha Osidach. Born in 1924 in Ladyzhichi,
Ukraine. I was a war messenger during World War
2. Famous for hiding messages in my braid.
I was walking unarmed between frontlines to
convey messages across the soviet ranks. I was
fearless and equipped with faith and hope only.
I served my duties until 1943 when
the Nazis caught me in Belorussia,
used enhanced interrogation techniques
on me, and then buried me alive.
My body was re-buried in my native village near
Chernobyl in 1965. Twenty years later my family
decided to order a monument of their heroine from
local sculptor Taras Miskovets who is an author
of a lot of sculptures in the exclusion zone.
My bronze figure was ready in 1986 but never
was erected in my hometown as by then
it had been evacuated due to radiation.
It remained kept in a safe place until it was
cleaned and erected in the Chernobyl schoolyard.
Then it was moved to the Chernobyl City
Park of Glory where you can find it today.
I am not the only person who served
her people and I won’t be the last.
Our faith and love for our nation are the only
things that make us braver and capable of doing
things that we won’t usually do. I, like many
others, paid my life to keep my nation free.
I hope it is still to this day
flourishing with free hearts.